# Managing UI State

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/01.md`

## Background

Normally an interactive application will need to hold state somewhere. In React,
you use special functions called "hooks" to do this. Common built-in hooks
include:

- `React.useState`
- `React.useEffect`
- `React.useContext`
- `React.useRef`
- `React.useReducer`

Each of these is a special function that you can call inside your custom React
component function to store data (like state) or perform actions (or
side-effects). There are a few more built-in hooks that have special use cases,
but the ones above are what you'll be using most of the time.

Each of the hooks has a unique API. Some return a value (like `React.useRef` and
`React.useContext`), others return a pair of values (like `React.useState` and
`React.useReducer`), and others return nothing at all (like `React.useEffect`).

Here's an example of a component that uses the `useState` hook and an onClick
event handler to update that state:

```jsx
function Counter() {
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const increment = () => setCount(count + 1)
  return <button onClick={increment}>{count}</button>
}
```

`React.useState` is a function that accepts a single argument. That argument is
the initial state for the instance of the component. In our case, the state will
start as `0`.

`React.useState` returns a pair of values. It does this by returning an array
with two elements (and we use destructuring syntax to assign each of those
values to distinct variables). The first of the pair is the state value and the
second is a function we can call to update the state. We can name these
variables whatever we want. Common convention is to choose a name for the state
variable, then prefix `set` in front of that for the updater function.

State can be defined as: data that changes over time. So how does this work over
time? When the button is clicked, our `increment` function will be called at
which time we update the `count` by calling `setCount`.

When we call `setCount`, that tells React to re-render our component. When it
does this, the entire `Counter` function is re-run, so when `React.useState` is
called this time, the value we get back is the value that we called `setCount`
with. And it continues like that until `Counter` is unmounted (removed from the
application), or the user closes the application.

ðŸ“œ To get a deeper dive on how React keeps track of hooks, read/watch this great
post/talk by [Shawn Wang](https://twitter.com/swyx):
[Getting Closure on Hooks](https://www.swyx.io/getting-closure-on-hooks/)

ðŸ“œ And here's a reference to
[the hooks official documentation](https://reactjs.org/hooks).

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/01.tsx)
- [Final](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.tsx)

This exercise should be familiar if you've been through the
[React Fundamentals](https://github.com/kentcdodds/react-fundamentals) workshop
already. Rather than retrieving the value of the input out of the
`form.elements`, we're going to keep track of the value in a state variable
called `username` and when the user submits the form we'll be able to simply
submit that variable.

The benefits of this approach will become apparent in the extra credit. We just
want to get you going on using the `React.useState` hook for the exercise.

## Extra Credit

### 1. ðŸ’¯ Initialize state

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.extra-1.tsx)

Make the `UsernameForm` accept a prop called `initialUsername` and initialize
the `username` state to that value. (Remember, the value you pass to the
`React.useState` call will be the initial value).

Go ahead and test it out by updating the `App` component to pass an
`initialUsername` prop along.

### 2. ðŸ’¯ Derived state for validation

TODO: fill this in

### 3. ðŸ’¯ Improve error UX

TODO: fill this in

### 4. ðŸ’¯ Improve error accessibility for screen readers

TODO: fill this in

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%8E%A3&e=01%3A%20useState%3A%20greeting&em=).
